`$id` updates (#1537)
json-schema-org/json-schema-spec: jsonschema-core.md

### Base IRI, Anchors, and Dereferencing

To differentiate between schemas in a vast ecosystem, schema resources are

> identified by [absolute IRIs](#rfc3987) (without fragments).  These identifiers
> are used to created references between schema resources. When comparing IRIs for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identified by [absolute IRIs](#rfc3987) (without fragments). These identifiers
are used to create references between schema resources. When comparing IRIs for
```

### Base IRI, Anchors, and Dereferencing

To differentiate between schemas in a vast ecosystem, schemas are identified by

> [absolute IRIs](#rfc3987) (without fragments) and can embed references to other
> schemas by specifying their respective IRIs. When comparing IRIs for the

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't sound right. I think there's something missing?

```suggestion
[absolute IRIs](#rfc3987) (without fragments) and can be used to embed references to other
schemas by specifying their respective IRIs. When comparing IRIs for the
```

Author: I think "which can be used to" is probably what's intended.  The IRIs are doing the embedding, not the schemas.  Then the "by specifying their respective IRIs" probably just gets removed.

Reviewer: Yes, that sounds better.

Does the "embed" part make sense? Should it just say "to reference schemas".

Author: What about this?

> To differentiate between schemas in a vast ecosystem, schemas are identified by [absolute IRIs](#rfc3987) (without fragments).  These identifiers are used to create references between schemas.  When comparing...

purposes of resource identification, implementations SHOULD first follow the IRI
normalization procedures defined in [RFC 3987](#rfc3987), section 5.3.

Several keywords can accept a relative [IRI reference](#rfc3987), or a value
used to construct a relative IRI reference. For these keywords, it is necessary
to establish a base IRI in order to resolve the reference.

#### The `$id` Keyword {#id-keyword}

> The `$id` keyword identifies a schema resource. The value for this keyword MUST
> be a string, and MUST represent a valid [IRI reference](#rfc3987) (without a
> fragment).

Reviewer: I suggest removing the parens in this statement. Previously, we used this with "absolute-IRI". In that case, the definition of absolute IRI already disallows a fragments and the parenthetical is just a helpful reminder of that fact.

However, fragments _are_ normally allowed in IRI references, so disallowing fragments is an important part of the requirement, not an aside, which makes it confusing why it's in parens.

```suggestion
The `$id` keyword identifies a schema resource. The value for this keyword MUST
be a string, and MUST represent a valid [IRI reference](#rfc3987) without a
fragment.
```

Author: Was thinking similarly.

6.5](#rfc3987) and [RFC 3986 section 5.1.1](#rfc3986) regarding base IRIs
embedded in content.

Note that this IRI is an identifier and not necessarily a network locator. In
the case of a network-addressable URL, a schema need not be downloadable from
its canonical IRI.

If present, the value for this keyword MUST be a string, and MUST represent a
valid [IRI-reference](#rfc3987). This IRI-reference SHOULD be normalized, and
MUST resolve to an [absolute-IRI](#rfc3987) (without a fragment).

The resulting absolute-IRI serves as the base IRI for relative IRI-references in
keywords within the schema resource, in accordance with [RFC 3987 section
6.5](#rfc3987) and [RFC 3986 section 5.1.1](#rfc3986) regarding base IRIs
embedded in content.

The presence of `$id` in a subschema indicates that the subschema constitutes a
distinct schema resource within a single schema document. Furthermore, in
accordance with [RFC 3987 section 6.5](#rfc3987) and [RFC 3986 section
5.1.2](#rfc3986) regarding encapsulating entities, if an `$id` in a subschema is
a relative IRI-reference, the base IRI for resolving that reference is the IRI

> of the parent schema resource. Note that an `$id` consisting of an empty IRI or

Reviewer: This needs to stay. As much as I'd like to remove the concept of embedded schemas from the spec, I don't think that was your intention.

Reviewer: > The first sentence in this paragraph is just restating the first sentence of the section, "The $id keyword identifies a schema resource."

I see what you mean, but I don't think readers will make the connection that it's not just an identifier for the root schema, but also away to embed a schema resource somewhere inside the root schema. Those who do make the connection will be looking for something else to confirm that connection is correct and won't find it.

> The second sentence here is replaced by the new text on lines 913-918.

Those two things don't say the same thing. The first refers to base IRIs embedded in content and the second refers to encapsulating entities. Those are treated as two different cases in RFC 3986/7, so I think we should treat them as two different cases as well.

I think the spec is better with that paragraph included.

Author: Previous text:

> The presence of `$id` in a subschema indicates that the subschema constitutes a
distinct schema resource within a single schema document. ... if an `$id` in a subschema is a relative IRI-reference, the base IRI for resolving that reference is the IRI of the parent schema resource.

New text:

> The `$id` keyword identifies a schema resource. ... When the value of [`$id`] is resolved against the current base IRI, the resulting absolute IRI then serves as the identifier for the schema resource and as a base IRI for relative IRI references in keywords within that schema resource and for nested schema resources...

These texts are saying the same things, specifically:

- `$id` identifies and declares a schema resource
- the value of `$id` is resolved against whatever comes from its parent

Maybe we need to define "current base IRI" better, but I'm almost sure it's defined elsewhere.

As I mentioned [here](https://github.com/json-schema-org/json-schema-spec/pull/1537#issuecomment-2408016806), the resolution of `$id` is somewhat recursive, which makes it hard to explain.

I'll have another go at this, but what's here needs improvement.

Reviewer: > for nested schema **_resources_**

I missed that last word. I thought this was talking about subschemas, not embedded schema resources. I think using the term "embedded" rather than "nested" is important to be consistent with how we talk about this concept throughout the spec and in discussion. Using a different word primed my brain to think you were explicitly not talking about embedded schema resources.

So, I think the new text works if the RFC reference mentions both "base IRIs embedded in content" _and_ "encapsulating entities".

To summarize, my suggestions are now
* Make it more explicit that `$id` in a subschema creates an embedded schema resource
* Use "embedded" instead of "nested"
* Reference "encapsulated entities" as well as "base IRIs embedded in content".

If we can do those things, I'm comfortable with the removed paragraph staying removed.

Author: > Reference "encapsulated entities" as well as "base IRIs embedded in content".

I'm not sure where you're meaning for this.

Reviewer: Looks like you figured out what I meant.

> in accordance with [RFC 3987 section
6.5](#rfc3987) and [RFC 3986 section 5.1.1](#rfc3986) regarding base IRIs
embedded in content.

:point_up: That was what I wanted.

Reviewer: For example,

> in accordance with [RFC 3987 section 6.5](#rfc3987) and [RFC 3986 section 5.1.1](#rfc3986) regarding base IRIs embedded in content ***and [RFC 3986 section 5.1.2](#rfc3986) regarding encapsulating entities.***

Section 5.1.1 (base IRIs embedded in content) covers base IRIs.
Section 5.1.2 (encapsulating entities) covers embedded schema resources.

Both need to be referenced.

its canonical IRI.

If present, the value for this keyword MUST be a string, and MUST represent a
valid [IRI reference](#rfc3987). This IRI reference SHOULD be normalized per RFC
3987, section 5.3, and MUST resolve to an [absolute IRI](#rfc3987) (without a

> fragment).

Author: I'll have a think about this.  I don't disagree, but I'll need to figure out where to put such a requirement.  This section does warrant a note to authors that implementations will be performing this normalization; probably a link to wherever this ends up.

> fragment).

Author: Leaving it in place and changing to

> If present, the value for this keyword MUST be a string, and MUST represent a valid [IRI reference](#rfc3987). When processing this IRI reference, implementations SHOULD normalize it per RFC 3987, section 5.3, so that it resolves to an [absolute IRI](#rfc3987) (without a fragment).

seems to work.  It puts the requirement on the implementation, but it also lets the user (if they're even reading this) know what they can expect from the implementation.

I do fear, though, that this gives license to users to put IRIs _with_ fragments in `$id`.  (It's almost like the output needs the ability to report a warning as well as an error. "Hey, uh, there's a fragment on that IRI, guy. You sure you want to do that? Probably don't.")

> fragment).

Reviewer: I don't think leaving it in place works because `$id` isn't the only way a schema might be assigned an IRI. For example, implementations often also allow users to assign IRIs to schemas when they're registered. The normalization requirement should also apply to those user provided IRIs and therefore needs to be somewhere where it doesn't only apply to `$id`.

One place I think it could work is in "Base IRI, Anchors, and Dereferencing" above. Here's a suggestion.

> To differentiate between schemas in a vast ecosystem, schemas are identified by [absolute IRIs](#rfc3987) (without a fragment).
>
> Schemas can embed references to other schemas by specifying their IRI. When implementations dereference these references, they SHOULD use the normalization procedures defined in RFC 3987, section 5.3 when comparing URIs.
>
> Several keywords can accept an [IRI reference](#rfc3987). The schema's identifier serves as the base IRI for resolving relative references.

Then I'd remove everything about normalization and fragments from this paragraph. If we want, we could include an informal warning that fragments are ignored because schemas are identified by absolute IRIs, but it shouldn't technically be necessary.

> fragment).

Author: We _do_ need information on valid values for `$id`, though.  I feel that's what at least the first sentence does.  I'll play with it.

> fragment).

Reviewer: Right, I was only suggesting removing the part about normalization and fragments. The part about it being an IRI reference needs to stay.

> fragment).

Author: I've moved the normalization up to the previous section as suggested.  I had to play with the wording a bit.

desired to identify the object containing the `$ref` in the second
(non-embedded) arrangement.

Due to the potential break in functionality described above, the behavior for
using JSON Pointer fragments that point to or cross a resource boundary is

> undefined.  Schema authors SHOULD NOT rely on such IRIs, as using them may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
undefined. Schema authors SHOULD NOT rely on such IRIs, as using them may
```

desired to identify the object containing the `$ref` in the second
(non-embedded) arrangement.

Due to the potential break in functionality described above, the behavior for
using JSON Pointer fragments that point to or cross a resource boundary is
undefined.  Schema authors SHOULD NOT rely on such IRIs, as using them may

> reduce interoperability.

Reviewer 2: It seems like it's not undefined - calling it undefined seems to me to contradict the above "an embedded schema resource and its subschemas can be identified by JSON Pointer fragments relative to either its own canonical IRI, _or relative to any containing resource's IRI_".

This also leaves `[^8]` with no reference to it.

And, minor, but two spaces after a period isn't consistent with the rest of the document.

Author: It was discussed that we need to make pointer that cross boundaries an undefined behavior rather than allowing implementations to support it.  Of course, implementations can still support it if they want, but the spec should push schema authors a bit more forcefully toward using the proper `$id` instead.

I think the critical point here is "an embedded schema resource _and its subschemas_".  It's arguable that an embedded schema resource isn't strictly a subschema since it can be refactored out without any change in behavior.  If we need to clarify that, I'm happy to.

Reviewer 2: Right, I get making this undefined is the main point of this PR (I edited my comment a bit to clarify that, had it slightly wrong initially ... I'm not sure this _should_ be undefined but if that is the way it is to be, okay).

To me "an embedded schema resource ... can be identified by JSON Pointer fragments ... relative to any containing resource's IRI" reads as defined behavior and not consistent with making it undefined some paragraphs later, and needs some change. I see your point on ambiguity whether "subschema" includes embedded schemas but I don't see language present that actually calls embedded schemas subschemas.

Author: I read that paragraph as informative, not prescriptive.  It's setting up the reasoning behind the requirement.

> Embedded schemas _can_ be referenced this way, but because reasons it's a bad idea to actually do it, so we're gonna say probably don't.  We're also letting implementations decide whether they want to support it, no pressure either way.

be `$defs` and the standard applicators from this document or
implementation-specific custom keywords.

Note that single-level custom keywords with identical syntax and semantics to
`$defs` do not allow for any intervening `$id` keywords, and therefore will
behave correctly under implementations that attempt to use any reference target
as a schema. However, this behavior is implementation-specific and MUST NOT be

> relied upon for interoperability.

Reviewer: I find this paragraph confusing. The word "intervening" doesn't make sense in this context. I also found it awkward that it starts by saying it will behave correctly, then says it must not be relied upon. I think it would be more clear if it was the other way around.

I think this was originally about unknown keywords. Since unknown keywords aren't allowed anymore, it becomes about custom vocabulary defined keywords. Therefore, I think this is saying that you can't use `$id` in a schema in a custom keyword. I don't think that's what we want. `$id` should work in any known schema, even in custom keywords.

Author: This paragraph was just moved up.  It was previously at line 1404 (which you can see just below).

> I also found it awkward that it starts by saying it will behave correctly, then says it must not be relied upon.

The text is "will behave correctly under implementations that attempt to use any reference target as a schema" which is correct.

> I think this was originally about unknown keywords.

It's not just about unknown keywords.  It's also about keywords that can define structure but not subschemas, like `default` or `const` (or custom keywords with structured data).  The point of this paragraph is to say that `$id` in any place where a schema is not expected is to treated as data, not an identifier.

Reviewer: Yes, I noticed that it was moved. I'm not arguing about its correctness. I can't even say anything about its correctness at this point because I don't understand what it's trying to say.

> It's not just about unknown keywords. It's also about keywords that can define structure but not subschemas, like `default` or `const` (or custom keywords with structured data).

I don't see how that paragraph can be understood to be about that. It appears this only applies to custom keywords with identical semantics to `$defs`.

> The point of this paragraph is to say that `$id` in any place where a schema is not expected is to treated as data, not an identifier.

That's well stated and clear. I suggest replacing the paragraph with some variation of that sentence.

Author: Yeah, reading it again, I don't think it's necessary.  It looks like it's just trying to explain that you _can't_ have an `$id` between the keyword simply because of the structure of the keyword.  I'm not sure that needs explaining, so I'll just remove it.

I'm not sure if we need to keep the "requirement" about "MUST NOT be relied upon". It's definitely a requirement on schema authors, but it's a weird one at that.

The next paragraph actually covers exactly what I was saying:

> A reference target under a keyword for which the value is known not to be a schema results in undefined behavior in order to avoid burdening implementations with the need to detect such targets.

be `$defs` and the standard applicators from this document or
implementation-specific custom keywords.

Multi-level structures of unknown keywords are capable of introducing nested
subschemas, which would be subject to the processing rules for `$id`. Therefore,
having a reference target in such an unrecognized structure cannot be reliably
implemented, and the resulting behavior is undefined. Similarly, a reference
target under a known keyword, for which the value is known not to be a schema,
results in undefined behavior in order to avoid burdening implementations with

> the need to detect such targets.[^10]

Reviewer 2: This seems to me to be a useful thing to address a longstanding issue/ambiguity , why remove it? Addressing schemas in unknown locations should be called out as undefined behavior.

Author: Unknown keywords are no longer a thing, so calling out data structures under them no longer makes sense.

Reviewer 2: Oh right, I'd forgotten that part, that's fine then.

Reviewer: I'm unresolving this conversation because my comment wasn't addressed. I assume it was missed. The second part of this paragraph is still relevant. It deals with known keywords. That means the footnote is still relevant as well, but we don't necessarily need to keep it.

> Similarly, a reference target under a _known keyword_, for which the value is known not to be a schema, results in undefined behavior in order to avoid burdening implementations with the need to detect such targets.[^10]

Author: Yeah I missed it. I think there was a concurrency error between me resolving the thread and you adding your comment.

I'll add that bit about known keywords back in.

`#/$defs/B`: canonical (and base) `IRI: https://example.com/other.json`
- canonical resource IRI plus pointer fragment:
  `https://example.com/other.json#`

> `#/$defs/B/$defs/X`: base IRI: `https://example.com/other.json`

Reviewer 2: It's a bit weird that this refers to the location using `#/$defs/B/$defs/X` in IRI format but that's not actually an IRI to be used to reference it. I wonder if changing these to pointer format without being in an IRI fragment would be better to distinguish them from IRIs used to resolve references.

Author: I could be talked into using a plain pointer in this appendix for these, yeah.  Let's see what others think.

Author: For reference, I would reformat like this:

```markdown
Document location: `/$defs/B/$defs/X`
- base IRI: `https://example.com/other.json`
- canonical resource IRI plus plain fragment:
  `https://example.com/other.json#bar`
- canonical resource IRI plus pointer fragment:
  `https://example.com/other.json#/$defs/X`
```

There's not any IRI-encoding going on in these pointers, so the difference is minimal, but it could communicate the point that the item header pointers are just indicating the location in the above document as written rather than a location within the schema.

Author: I also considered doing a table here, but I wasn't sure whether we had set up the transpiler to support those.  We don't have any in the specs yet, either.  (Adventures in markdown!)

Author: Done.  @notEthan please let me know if this is better.

Reviewer: > I also considered doing a table here, but I wasn't sure whether we had set up the transpiler to support those. We don't have any in the specs yet, either. (Adventures in markdown!)

The markdown compiler supports Github-flavored markdown, so you should have available to you all the [table syntax you have in Github](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-gfm?tab=readme-ov-file#use). There are also [plugins to expand on the table features](https://github.com/wataru-chocola/remark-extended-table) we can add if we need it.

Author: I might play with tables later.

and direct you to read the CREF located in the [JSON Pointer fragments and
embedded schema resources](#embedded) section for further comments.

> While the following IRIs do correctly indicate specific schemas, per the reasons
> outlined in {{embedded}}, they are to be avoided:

Reviewer: I think this language needs to be a little stronger. As a reader, I might assume this statement means it's just poor style and not realize that it there is an interoperability concern.

```suggestion
While the following IRIs do correctly indicate specific schemas, per the reasons
outlined in {{embedded}}, they may not work in all implementations:
```

Author: I think stating both is probably good.

```suggestion
While the following IRIs do correctly indicate specific schemas, per the reasons
outlined in {{embedded}}, they are to be avoided as they may not work in all implementations:
```

The "are to be avoided" is quite strong IMO, but I agree with adding _why_.
